Note 1: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies Nature of OperationsUnitil Corporation (Unitil or the Company) is a public utility holding company. Unitil and its subsidiaries are subject to regulation as a holding company system by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) under the Energy Policy Act of 2005. The following companies are wholly-owned subsidiaries of Unitil: Unitil Energy Systems, Inc. (Unitil Energy), Fitchburg Gas and Electric Light Company (Fitchburg), Northern Utilities, Inc. (Northern Utilities), Granite State Gas Transmission, Inc. (Granite State), Unitil Power Corp. (Unitil Power), Unitil Realty Corp. (Unitil Realty), Unitil Service Corp. (Unitil Service) and its non-regulated business unit Unitil Resources, Inc. (Unitil Resources). Usource, Inc. and Usource L.L.C. are wholly-owned subsidiaries of Unitil Resources. The Company's results will reflect the seasonal nature of the natural gas distribution business. Accordingly, the Company expects that results of operations will be positively affected during the first and fourth quarters, when sales of natural gas are typically higher due to heating-related requirements, and negatively affected during the second and third quarters, when gas operating and maintenance expenses usually exceed sales margins in the period. Unitil's principal business is the local distribution of electricity in the southeastern seacoast and capital city areas of New Hampshire and the greater Fitchburg area of north central Massachusetts and the local distribution of natural gas in southeastern New Hampshire, portions of southern Maine to the Lewiston-Auburn area and in the greater Fitchburg area of north central Massachusetts. Unitil has three distribution utility subsidiaries, Unitil Energy, which operates in New Hampshire; Fitchburg, which operates in Massachusetts; and Northern Utilities, which operates in New Hampshire and Maine (collectively referred to as the "distribution utilities"). Granite State is an interstate natural gas transmission pipeline company, operating 86 miles of underground gas transmission pipeline primarily located in Maine, New Hampshire and Massachusetts. Granite State provides Northern Utilities with interconnection to major natural gas pipelines and access to North American pipeline supplies. Granite State derives its revenues principally from the transportation services provided to Northern Utilities and, to a lesser extent, third-party marketers. A fifth utility subsidiary, Unitil Power, formerly functioned as the full requirements wholesale power supply provider for Unitil Energy. In connection with the implementation of electric industry restructuring in New Hampshire, Unitil Power ceased being the wholesale supplier of Unitil Energy on May 1, 2003 and divested of its long-term power supply contracts through the sale of the entitlements to the electricity associated with various electric power supply contracts it had acquired to serve Unitil Energy's customers. Unitil also has three other wholly-owned subsidiaries: Unitil Service, Unitil Realty and Unitil Resources. Unitil Service provides, at cost, a variety of administrative and professional services, including regulatory, financial, accounting, human resources, engineering, operations, technology, energy management and management services on a centralized basis to its affiliated Unitil companies. Unitil Realty owns and manages the Company's corporate office in Hampton, New Hampshire and leases this facility to Unitil Service under a long-term lease arrangement. Unitil Resources is the Company's wholly-owned non-regulated subsidiary. Usource, Inc. and Usource L.L.C. (collectively, Usource) are wholly- owned subsidiaries of Unitil Resources. Usource provides brokering and advisory services to a national client base of large commercial and industrial customers. Basis of Presentation Principles of ConsolidationThe Company's consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Unitil and all of its wholly-owned subsidiaries and all intercompany transactions are eliminated in consolidation. Regulatory AccountingThe Company's principal business is the distribution of electricity and natural gas by the three distribution utilities: Unitil Energy, Fitchburg and Northern Utilities. Unitil Energy and Fitchburg are subject to regulation by the FERC. Fitchburg is also regulated by the Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities (MDPU), Unitil Energy is regulated by the New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission (NHPUC) and Northern Utilities is regulated by the Maine Public Utilities Commission (MPUC) and NHPUC. Granite State, the Company's natural gas transmission pipeline, is regulated by the FERC. Accordingly, the Company uses the Regulated Operations guidance as set forth in the Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification (FASB Codification). The Company has recorded Regulatory Assets and Regulatory Liabilities which will be recovered from customers, or applied for customer benefit, in accordance with rate provisions approved by the applicable public utility regulatory commission. December 31, Regulatory Assets consist of the following (millions) 2011 2010 Energy Supply Contract Obligations $ 12.9 $ 21.7 Deferred Restructuring Costs 21.8 25.0 SubtotalRestructuring Related Items 34.7 46.7 Retirement Benefit Obligations 55.3 47.1 Income Taxes 10.9 12.7 Environmental Obligations 17.5 20.3 Deferred Storm Charges 22.4 21.0 Other 17.8 10.9 Total Regulatory Assets $ 158.6 $ 158.7 Less: Current Portion of Regulatory Assets (1) 18.8 15.7 Regulatory Assetsnoncurrent $ 139.8 $ 143.0 (1) Reflects amounts included in Accrued Revenue on the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets. Generally, the Company receives a return on investment on its regulated assets for which a cash outflow has been made. Regulatory commissions can reach different conclusions about the recovery of costs, which can have a material impact on the Company's consolidated financial statements. The Company believes it is probable that its regulated distribution and transmission utilities will recover their investments in long-lived assets, including regulatory assets. If the Company, or a portion of its assets or operations, were to cease meeting the criteria for application of these accounting rules, accounting standards for businesses in general would become applicable and immediate recognition of any previously deferred costs, or a portion of deferred costs, would be required in the year in which the criteria are no longer met, if such deferred costs were not recoverable in the portion of the business that continues to meet the criteria for application of the FASB Codification topic on Regulated Operations. If unable to continue to apply the FASB Codification provisions for Regulated Operations, the Company would be required to apply the provisions for the Discontinuation of Rate-Regulated Accounting included in the FASB Codification. In the Company's opinion, its regulated operations will be subject to the FASB Codification provisions for Regulated Operations for the foreseeable future. CashCash includes all cash and cash equivalents to which the Company has legal title. Cash equivalents include short-term investments with original maturities of three months or less and interest bearing deposits. The Company's cash and cash equivalents are held at financial institutions and at times may exceed federally insured limits. The Company has not experienced any losses in such accounts. Under the Independent System OperatorNew England (ISO-NE) Financial Assurance Policy (Policy), Unitil's affiliates Unitil Energy, Fitchburg and Unitil Power are required to provide assurance of their ability to satisfy their obligations to ISO-NE. Under this Policy, Unitil's affiliates provide cash deposits covering approximately 2-1/2 months of outstanding obligations. On December 31, 2011 and 2010, the Unitil affiliates had deposited $4.6 million and $7.0 million, respectively to satisfy their ISO-NE obligations. In addition, Northern Utilities has cash margin deposits to satisfy requirements for its natural gas hedging program. On December 31, 2011 and 2010, there was $2.6 million and $1.5 million, respectively, deposited for this purpose. Goodwill and Intangible AssetsAs a result of the acquisitions of Northern Utilities and Granite State, the Company recognized a bargain purchase adjustment as a reduction to Utility Plant, to be amortized over a ten year period, beginning with the date of the Acquisitions, as authorized by regulators. As of December 31, 2011, the unamortized balance of the bargain purchase adjustment was $17.1 million, to be amortized over the next seven years. Off-Balance Sheet ArrangementsAs of December 31, 2011, the Company does not have any significant arrangements that would be classified as Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements. In the ordinary course of business, the Company does contract for certain office equipment, vehicles and other equipment under operating leases (See Note 3). DerivativesThe Company has a regulatory commission approved hedging program for Northern Utilities designed to fix a portion of its gas supply costs for the coming year of service. In order to fix these costs, the Company purchases natural gas futures contracts on the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) that correspond to the associated delivery month. Any gains or losses resulting from the change in the fair value of these derivatives are passed through to ratepayers directly through a regulatory commission approved recovery mechanism. The fair value of these derivatives is determined using Level 2 inputs (valuations based on quoted prices available in active markets for similar assets or liabilities, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in inactive markets, inputs other than quoted prices that are directly observable, and inputs derived principally from market data), specifically based on the NYMEX closing prices for outstanding contracts as of the balance sheet date. As a result of the ratemaking process, the Company records gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of the derivatives as regulatory liabilities or assets, then reclassifies these gains or losses into Purchased Gas when the gains and losses are passed through to customers in accordance with rate reconciling mechanisms. As of December 31, 2011 and December 31, 2010, the Company had 1.6 billion and 1.3 billion cubic feet (BCF), respectively, outstanding in natural gas purchase contracts under its hedging program. The tables below show derivatives, which are part of the regulatory approved hedging program, that are not designated as hedging instruments, under FASB ASC 815-20. As discussed above, the change in fair value related to these derivatives is recorded initially as a Regulatory Asset then reclassified to Purchased Gas in accordance with the recovery mechanism. The tables below include disclosure of the Regulatory Asset and reclassifications from the Regulatory Asset into Purchased Gas. Fair Value Amount (millions) Offset in Regulatory Assets (1), as of: Fair Value Description Balance Sheet Location December 31,2011 December 31,2010 Natural Gas Futures Contracts Other Current Liabilities $ 1.7 $ 0.8 Natural Gas Futures Contracts Other Noncurrent Liabilities 0.6 0.2 Total $ 2.3 $ 1.0 (1) The current portion of Regulatory Assets is recorded as Accrued Revenue on the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets. Twelve Months EndedDecember 31, (millions) 2011 2010 Amount of (Gain) / Loss Recognized in Regulatory Assets for Derivatives: Natural Gas Futures Contracts $ 2.9 $ 3.9 Amount of Loss Reclassified into Consolidated Statements of Earnings(2): Purchased Gas $ 1.6 $ 5.2 ( 2 ) These amounts are offset in the Consolidated Statements of Earnings with the recognition of accrued revenue as a component of Gas Operating Revenue and therefore there is no effect on earnings. Utility Revenue RecognitionUtility revenues are recognized according to regulations and are based on rates and charges approved by federal and state regulatory commissions. Revenues related to the sale of electric and gas service are recorded when service is rendered or energy is delivered to customers. However, the determination of energy sales to individual customers is based on the reading of their meters, which occurs on a systematic basis throughout the month. At the end of each calendar month, amounts of energy delivered to customers since the date of the last meter reading are estimated and the corresponding unbilled revenue is estimated. This unbilled revenue is estimated each month based on estimated customer usage by class and applicable customer rates. On August 1, 2011, the MDPU issued an order approving revenue decoupling mechanisms (RDM) for the electric and natural gas divisions of the Company's Massachusetts combination electric and natural gas distribution utility, Fitchburg. Revenue decoupling is the term given to the elimination of the dependency of a utility's distribution revenue on the volume of electricity or natural gas sales. One of the primary purposes of decoupling is to eliminate the disincentive a utility otherwise has to encourage and promote energy conservation programs designed to reduce energy usage. Under the RDM, the Company will recognize, in its Consolidated Statements of Earnings from August 1, 2011 forward, distribution revenues for Fitchburg based on established revenue targets. The established revenue targets for the gas division may be subject to periodic adjustments to account for customer growth and special contracts, for which RDM does not apply. The difference between distribution revenue amounts billed to customers and the targeted amounts is recognized as increases or decreases in Accrued Revenue which form the basis for future reconciliation adjustments in periodically resetting rates for future cash recoveries from, or credits to, customers. The Company's other electric and natural gas distribution utilities are not subject to RDM. Revenue RecognitionNon-regulated OperationsUsource, Unitil's competitive energy brokering subsidiary, records energy brokering revenues based upon the estimated amount of electricity and gas delivered to customers through the end of the accounting period. Allowance for Doubtful AccountsThe Company recognizes a provision for doubtful accounts each month based upon the Company's experience in collecting electric and gas utility service accounts receivable in prior years. At the end of each month, an analysis of the delinquent receivables is performed which takes into account an assumption about the cash recovery of delinquent receivables. The analysis also calculates the amount of written-off receivables that are recoverable through regulatory rate reconciling mechanisms. The Company's distribution utilities are authorized by regulators to recover the costs of their energy commodity portion of bad debts through rate mechanisms. Evaluating the adequacy of the Allowance for Doubtful Accounts requires judgment about the assumptions used in the analysis, including expected fuel assistance payments from governmental authorities and the level of customers enrolling in payment plans with the Company. Retirement Benefit ObligationsThe Company sponsors the Unitil Corporation Retirement Plan (Pension Plan), which is a defined benefit pension plan covering substantially all of its employees. The Company also sponsors an unfunded retirement plan, the Unitil Corporation Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan (SERP), covering certain executives of the Company, and an employee 401(k) savings plan. Additionally, the Company sponsors the Unitil Employee Health and Welfare Benefits Plan (PBOP Plan), primarily to provide health care and life insurance benefits to retired employees. The Company records on its balance sheets as an asset or liability the overfunded or underfunded status of its retirement benefit obligations (RBO) based on the projected benefit obligations. The Company has recognized a corresponding Regulatory Asset, to recognize the future collection of these obligations in electric and gas rates. (See Note 9). Use of EstimatesThe preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America requires the Company to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, and requires disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Commitments and ContingenciesThe Company's accounting policy is to record and/or disclose commitments and contingencies in accordance with the FASB Codification as it applies to an existing condition, situation, or set of circumstances involving uncertainty as to possible loss that will ultimately be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur. As of December 31, 2011, the Company is not aware of any material commitments or contingencies other than those disclosed in the Commitments and Contingencies footnote to the Company's consolidated financial statements below. (See Note 5). Utility PlantThe cost of additions to Utility Plant and the cost of renewals and betterments are capitalized. Cost consists of labor, materials, services and certain indirect construction costs, including an allowance for funds used during construction (AFUDC). The average interest rates applied to AFUDC were 2.28%, 2.25% and 3.24% in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. The costs of current repairs and minor replacements are charged to appropriate operating expense accounts. The original cost of utility plant retired or otherwise disposed of and the cost of removal, less salvage, are charged to the accumulated provision for depreciation. The Company includes in its mass asset depreciation rates, which are periodically reviewed as part of its ratemaking proceedings, depreciation amounts to provide for future negative salvage value. At December 31, 2011 and 2010, the Company estimates that the negative salvage value of future retirements recorded on the consolidated balance sheets in Accumulated Depreciation is $46.5 million and $40.8 million, respectively. Depreciation and AmortizationDepreciation expense is calculated on a group straight-line basis based on the useful lives of assets, and judgment is involved when estimating the useful lives of certain assets. The Company conducts independent depreciation studies on a periodic basis as part of the regulatory ratemaking process and considers the results presented in these studies in determining the useful lives of the Company's fixed assets. A change in the estimated useful lives of these assets could have a material impact on the Company's consolidated financial statements. Provisions for depreciation were equivalent to the following composite rates, based on the average depreciable property balances at the beginning and end of each year: 2011  3.43%, 2010  3.99% and 2009  4.02%. Gas InventoryThe weighted average cost methodology is used to value natural gas in storage. Environmental MattersThe Company's past and present operations include activities that are generally subject to extensive federal and state environmental laws and regulations. The Company has recovered or will recover substantially all of the costs of the environmental remediation work performed to date from customers or from its insurance carriers. The Company believes it is in compliance with all applicable environmental and safety laws and regulations, and the Company believes that as of December 31, 2011, there are no material losses that would require additional liability reserves to be recorded other than those disclosed in Note 5, Commitments and Contingencies. Changes in future environmental compliance regulations or in future cost estimates of environmental remediation costs could have a material effect on the Company's financial position if those amounts are not recoverable in regulatory rate mechanisms. Stock-based Employee CompensationUnitil accounts for stock-based employee compensation using the fair value-based method (See Note 2). Sales and Consumption TaxesThe Company bills its customers sales tax in Massachusetts and Maine and consumption tax in New Hampshire. These taxes are remitted to the appropriate departments of revenue in each state and are excluded from revenues on the Company's Consolidated Statements of Earnings. Income TaxesThe Company is subject to Federal and State income taxes as well as various other business taxes. This process involves estimating the Company's current tax liabilities as well as assessing temporary and permanent differences resulting from the timing of the deductions of expenses and recognition of taxable income for tax and book accounting purposes. These temporary differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included in the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets. The Company accounts for income tax assets, liabilities and expenses in accordance with the FASB Codification guidance on Income Taxes. The Company classifies penalty and interest expense related to income tax liabilities as income tax expense and interest expense, respectively, in the Consolidated Statements of Earnings. Provisions for income taxes are calculated in each of the jurisdictions in which the Company operates for each period for which a statement of earnings is presented. The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with the FASB Codification guidance on Income Taxes which requires an asset and liability approach for the financial accounting and reporting of income taxes. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining the current and deferred tax assets and liabilities. The Company's current and deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect its best assessment of estimated future taxes to be paid. In accordance with the FASB Codification, the Company periodically assesses the realization of its deferred tax assets and liabilities and adjusts the income tax provision, the current tax liability and deferred taxes in the period in which the facts and circumstances which gave rise to the revision become known. DividendsThe Company's dividend policy is reviewed periodically by the Board of Directors. The amount and timing of all dividend payments is subject to the discretion of the Board of Directors and will depend upon business conditions, results of operations, financial conditions and other factors. For the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, the Company paid a dividend at an annual rate of $1.38 per common share. Other Recently Issued PronouncementsIn December 2011, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2011-11, "Balance Sheet (Topic 210): Disclosures about Offsetting Assets and Liabilities." The amendments in this ASU require an entity to disclose information about offsetting and related arrangements to enable users of its financial statements to understand the effect of those arrangements on its financial position. An entity is required to apply the amendments for annual reporting periods beginning on or after January 1, 2013, and interim periods within those annual periods. An entity should provide the disclosures required by those amendments retrospectively for all comparative periods presented. The Company does not expect that the adoption of ASU 2011-11 will have a significant, if any, impact on the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements. In May 2011, the FASB issued ASU No. 2011-04, "Amendments to Achieve Common Fair Value Measurement and Disclosure Requirements in U.S. GAAP and IFRS", (ASU 2011-04). This update changes certain fair value measurement principles and enhances the disclosure requirements particularly for Level 3 fair value measurements. This update is effective for reporting periods beginning on or after December 15, 2011, with early adoption prohibited, and requires prospective application. The Company does not expect that the adoption of ASU 2011-04 will have a significant, if any, impact on the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements. Subsequent EventsThe Company evaluates all events or transactions through the date of the related filing. During the period through the date of this filing, the Company did not have any material subsequent events that impacted its consolidated financial statements. ReclassificationsCertain amounts previously reported have been reclassified to improve the financial statements' presentation and to conform to current year presentation.
